---
path: '/2022/3/aws-s3-general-info-20220329131437'
title: 'aws s3 general info'
date: '20220329131437'
category: 'aws'
tags: ['developer associate', 'certification', 's3', 'storage']
---

# aws s3 general info
AWS S3 (Simple Storage Service) is scalable object storage, durable, and highly-scalable.

Used for file storage (objects) in a scalable way from anywhere on the web. Extremely
cost effective.

## Management of objects
Any file can be uploaded to S3, these are stored as objects rather than in file
systems or data blocks.

## Features
* Unlimited storage - total volume and number of storage is unlimited
* Objects can be up to 5TB in size each, minimum being 0 bytes
* S3 buckets - store files (similar to folders)
* **Universal namespace** - shared by *all* AWS accounts in a global namespace. Each
bucket name in the world must be globally unique
* Successfully uploaded files return an HTTP 200 code (CLI/API return value)
* Tiered storage with different use cases
* Life cycle management for things like transitioning data to cheaper storage, or
expiring objects (deleting) after a certain time
* Versioning files to ensure they can be rolled back/recovered

Example S3 URL:
```
https://bucket-name.s3.Region.amazonaws.com/key-name
https://fayecloudguru.s3.us-east-1.amazonaws.com/Ralphie.jpg
```

## Key value store
* key - name of the object (file name)
* value - the data itself
* version id - important for storing multiple versions of the same object
* metadata - data about the data you're storing, like content-type or last-modified

## Reliability
S3 is safe across multiple devices, zones, and is disaster resistant. The service
is built for between 99.95%-99.99% service availability depending on the S3 tier
chosen to store the data.

Designed for 11 9's (99.999999999%) durability for data stored in S3. The loss for
a single object at this tier would be 1x every ~10,000 years.

## Data security
1. Server-side encryption - default encryption on a bucket to encrypt all new objects
1. Access control lists (ACLs) - to give fine grained access to individual objects
1. Bucket policies - specifying which actions are allowed/denied (ex. allow a user to PUT but not DELETE)

